When 62-year-old fisherman Kpana Charlie has finished sorting through the day's catch and patching up the holes in his nets, he likes to settle into a weathered wooden chair on his front porch and let his mind drift back to his childhood. Back then, his home on Sierra Leone's Nyangai Island seemed like paradise.

He spent endless hours playing with his friends on the island's dazzling white beaches or splashing about in the warm, green sea. He liked to kick around a soccer ball on the sports field in his village, and in mango season, he would shimmy up the trees to collect their bountiful fruit. Whenever he wanted to avoid having to do his homework, he could simply disappear into the dense forest that covered much of the island.

Today, Nyangai is disappearing before his very eyes, swallowed up by the relentless sea. As recently as ten years ago, it still measured some 2,300 feet from end to end. What's left today is a patch of sand barely 300 feet long and 250 wide. The forests are gone, swamped by saltwater. The soccer field lies under water for 22 hours of the day. And the land on which Charlie's family home once stood, the home he was born in, has long since vanished beneath the waves. In as little as two years, Charlie fears, Nyangai may no longer exist at all.

"It's getting worse and worse," says Charlie, a father of six who has lived in a makeshift home of sticks and tarpaulin since his previous home was washed away. "There's nowhere to go to the toilet. There's nowhere to be free. Whenever the water's high the place floods all over. It never used to happen like this."

With nearly a third of its population living in coastal areas, and its heavy reliance on subsistence agriculture and fishing, Sierra Leone has been identified as one of the world's most vulnerable countries to the impacts of climate change, despite having contributed just a tiny fraction of global CO2 emissions. With a GDP per capita of barely $2,000, it is also one of the least prepared to deal with those impacts.

With global sea levels projected to rise by anywhere between 1 and 3 feet by the end of the century, along with an increase in extreme weather events, the experience of this West African island offers a glimpse into the possible fate of countless other low-lying areas around the world.


"We're seeing significant sea-level rise and these people don't have any proper defenses," he says. "All they have is sandbags. If we don't act now the impacts on people are just going to get worse."

Nyangai is one of a cluster of islands that make up the Turtle Islands archipelago. Low-lying and with loose, sandy soils, the islands have always been shaped by the sea. Their beaches shift slowly over time. Sand is eroded from one headland and deposited on the next. But the scale of the destruction of Nyangai, and the speed at which it's playing out, is like nothing the islanders have ever seen.

The island's chief, Mustafa Kong, estimates that 20 years ago there were more than 500 homes on Nyangai, with an average of 8 people living in each. Now there are barely 70. Most people have left for the safety of neighboring islands or the mainland, joining the estimated 20 million people worldwide displaced by climate change and extreme weather events on average each year.

There is little reliable data on sea level change in Sierra Leone. Until two years ago, the country did not even have a fully functional marine meteorological station that could measure it. But, a 2017 USAID climate vulnerability study found that parts of its coastline are already receding at a rate of 13-to-20 feet per year.

From their vantage point on Nyangai, most of the islanders say it's hard to gauge how much the sea level itself is rising. What's more apparent, they say, is that the storms have become more severe and more frequent, the rainfall more violent and less predictable, and the winds stronger, driving ever more destructive waves that batter and erode their shrinking island.

When Charlies was growing up, the thought had never even crossed his mind that the island on which his family had lived for three generations could be at serious risk from the sea. But, by 2012, he'd started to become worried. He remembers vividly the first time he truly began to believe the island might become uninhabitable. It was a Friday night in August 2012, and the islanders woke up to the sound of a howling gale and waves crashing into the walls of their homes. By midnight, panic had taken over, as families rushed to save their possessions and store them in the comparative safety of their boats. By the time the storm eventually abated, 35 houses had been washed away.

"It was chaos," says Charlie. "Everyone was so afraid. The next morning, we all decided to leave. I told myself I couldn't stay here any longer."

Many left the island soon after, but as calm gradually returned, Charlie changed his mind. He no longer felt safe on the island, but the prospect of setting up a new life elsewhere was no less daunting. Nyangai was his home. He liked that the island was free of snakes and, with no fresh water for mosquitoes to breed, virtually free of malaria. His family owned land there, and the surrounding waters provided his livelihood. Besides, moving would be hugely expensive.

"Now we're always prepared because we know we'll have to move," says Charlie. "We just don't know when."

On a Friday in late September, Charlie stands by the shore in the shade of one of the few trees still standing, watching as the high tide breached the top of the beach and began flowing down through people's homes on the other side. The islanders scramble to make what rudimentary defenses they can. One woman builds a ridge of sand around the base of her house to try to channel the water elsewhere. Another grabs a tattered sheet of tarpaulin and wedges it beneath her front door.

By 8 a.m., at least a dozen houses have been flooded, yet again, and a knee-deep pool of muddy water has accumulated in the center of the island. Children run out to play in it.

"The kids love it when it floods," complains one bystander. "They don't understand that that's what will destroy the island. The water is destroying us, one house at a time."

As the tide continues to rise, shopkeeper Tene Kamara races to pack up her inventory — soap, toothpaste, sandals and other basic goods imported from the mainland — and store them on tabletops above the reach of the water. Kamara spent 15 years building up her business on Nyangai after moving to the island from Freetown. She used to do a brisk trade, she says, but with the population shrinking by the month, she's finding it ever harder to turn a profit.

